India's major trade liberalization of the early 1990s offers some insights into the trade-inequality relationship. In the space of about one decade, average tariff rates fell drastically, from above 80% to about 25%. This reform naturally created incentives for resource reallocation as the relative prices of different goods and services changed. During this period, overall poverty continued a decline that pre-dated the major reform period.<br><br>
Although poverty fell overall, careful studies of the reforms and their effects in Indian society reveal considerable, systematic heterogeneity.<br><br>

A series of studies by economist Petia Topalova and others exploited district-wise spatial variation in the extent of trade liberalization - and used this as a measure of the degree to which trade opening affected local economies.<br><br>

These studies found that the gains from trade liberalization were lower in districts more exposed to trade.<br><br>
As tariffs fell, some jobs were destroyed, and others jobs were created. The rate of job destruction was higher in more trade-exposed districts. But even though job creation elsewhere more than compensated for this, poor people faced significant barriers to spatial mobility. This inhibited their efforts to move to opportunity.<br><br>

This account of spatial immobility undermining gains from trade is another example of the two-targets two-policies dictum that we have seen in previous modules. The problem with trade liberalization was not an overall loss of jobs but the inability of workers to reassign themselves—in this case, over space.<br><br>

Viet Nam's trade liberalization experience offers some similarities and some contrasts to the Indian case. Notably, for the majority of workers, mobility was not such a great issue, so as reforms opened up many new jobs in urban centres, there was a huge migration from rural areas to fill them.<br><br>
The US-Viet Nam Bilateral Trade Agreement of 2001 greatly lowered the US tariffs on Vietnamese exports, and this reform boosted manufacturing industries in particular. These industries are highly concentrated in Ho Chi Minh City as well as the surrounding Southeast region and in Hanoi. These regions saw high rates of in-migration, and other regions showed correspondingly high rates of outmigration, as seen in the figure, which used the data from the 2009 census.<br><br>

The gains from this trade liberalization shock were both direct, that is, workers gained higher wages in new jobs, and indirect since many migrant workers also sent remittances home to their families. Migration and remittances perform the vital role of spreading gains from globalization throughout an economy, even to households and communities living far away from the trade-affected areas. Labour mobility is the key to this spread of benefits.<br><br>
Even in Viet Nam, however, mobility remains an issue for some. Most members of Viet Nam's ethnic minority groups, who make up about 15% of the population, live far from the major centres of economic growth and are less able to move to opportunity for a variety of reasons. As a result, they are less able to take advantage of new employment opportunities, and in addition, less able to generate the remittance backflows that spread gains from trade to their home communities. Limits on labour mobility reduce the capacity for gains from trade-related growth.<br><br>
Largely as a consequence of immobility, poverty among Viet Nam's ethnic minority populations has fallen far more slowly than among its ethnic majority population.<br><br>

At the beginning of Viet Nam's economic reform period, poverty was quite evenly distributed among the population. However, in the 2010s, poverty was then highly concentrated among ethnic minority groups.<br><br>
Some types of trade-related growth generate challenges of their own. We will see the environmental dimension of this in a later module. Here, we focus on the competition between low-skill jobs and educational attainment. The income effects of trade are expected to increase household spending on school. However, higher wages and more job opportunities for blue-collar workers may encourage some children and teenagers to leave school early.<br><br>
We see evidence for this in these data from Viet Nam, where teen dropout rates are higher in districts that have a greater intensity of jobs in foreign-invested firms. However, it is important to note that very few teenagers work directly in these foreign-invested firms. Far more frequently, they are employed in industries that flourish around industrial zones, that is, in construction, personal services, trade and transportation services, and many other service sectors.<br><br>
The lessons from India and Viet Nam are that the poverty and inequality effects of trade are context-specific. They depend a lot on adjustments in labour markets. Trade creates opportunities for broad-based income growth, but the distribution of gains is bounded by labour immobility. In India especially, we find that state-level laws that restrict firm hiring and firing are known to discourage expansion even when trade reforms provide incentives. Once again, to capture the sustained and inclusive growth that trade makes possible requires more than one policy instrument: in this case, trade opening plus measures to ensure more equal access to labour market opportunities. In this way, progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals and opening to trade can be strongly complementary.<br><br>
We also note that when educational systems are not strong, trade may undermine progress in school attainment through its effects on opportunity cost. The draw of the labour market is very strong for teenagers, especially those of less than top ability or from lower-income households. Again, complementary measures are needed. For example, upper-secondary curricula should do more than simply prepare students to enter tertiary education. Some students may require subsidies to offset the opportunity cost of remaining outside the labour market. Making part-time work more accessible to them could reduce their opportunity cost of studying and their financial constraints. More ambitiously, an effective and affordable system of vocational education for returning adult students offers second chances for education and skill acquisition to those who left school early.<br><br>
The discussion in this module reiterates a point in earlier modules that the benefits of trade are conditional on appropriate institutions and policies. When these are in place, worker protections and other measures help ensure that the opportunities created by trade translate into more productive employment and decent work. When institutions (for example, enforceability of regulations, the rule of law, and recourse to the legal system) are missing, or when policies undermine accountability, trade opportunities may translate into exploitative employment, including dirty, dangerous, and demeaning work.<br><br>