Indonesia's evolving food trade policies highlight some of the concerns over food trade policy and the Sustainable Development Goals. After the year 2004, Indonesia's food trade policy shifted sharply from stabilization toward protecting domestic producers. We can see the results of this policy shift in the historical comparison of domestic and international rice prices in this graph. Before 2004, the domestic rice price closely tracked the world price. The domestic price began to diverge and rise above the international price after 2004.<br><br>
The new policies after about 2004 effectively imposed an import quota on rice. This helped push up domestic prices, which was good for net producers of rice, but increased costs and thus reduced access to food for all other agents in the economy. Since the majority of Indonesia's poor households are net consumers of rice, poverty has increased. We can conclude that this policy ran directly counter to the goal of food security and poverty reduction.<br><br>
Beyond direct impacts, trade and trade policies for food also have indirect effects that can alter household wellbeing.<br><br> 

One of these is through returns to and uses of land, which is a major income-earning asset of the rural poor in developing countries. Farmers maximize profits by allocating land and other resources to the most valuable activities. A policy that impedes this efficient allocation reduces their income.<br><br> 

One example comes from Vietnam's food self-sufficiency policy, a set of land use constraints popularly known as the "rice first" policy.<br><br>
 From the 1980s, Vietnam's Rice First land-use policies determined that a large area of land, mainly in the Mekong Delta, be used exclusively for rice production. The policy provided for large-scale infrastructure to manage water in the Mekong Delta for this purpose. However, this set of policies became unsustainable, as climate change and upstream dam-building along the Mekong River undermined the viability of multi-crop rice production - in large parts of the central Delta and along its coastal margins. A drought in 2016, which greatly reduced freshwater injections and accelerated saline water intrusion, was instrumental in stimulating policy change. In 2020, the Rice First policy was redefined and reimagined in response to climate change and economic realities. This frees up farmers to reallocate land to higher-value and more suitable commercial crops such as fruit and crustaceans.<br><br>
Looking to the longer term, policies that increase land area devoted to annual crops such as rice or corn may also have long-run effects through changes in the quality of the land resource.<br><br>

Higher domestic food prices increase incentives to expand planted area – even in lands that are not well suited to intensive cultivation. The most vulnerable soils in tropical monsoon climates are on sloping lands. Because these are typically in less accessible areas, they are also most often farmed by very poor households. Higher food prices increase pressures to expand farmed areas. Remember, small, poor farmers are typically net consumers of food. Soil erosion due to repeated intensive farming depletes nutrients on-farm and causes pollution and other problems downstream.<br><br>
The data here from the Philippines illustrate differential rates of soil erosion under different cropping systems. Soil erosion from agricultural activities happens much more rapidly in sloping lands.<br><br>
During the 1960s-1980s, the Philippines' food policy emphasized domestic supply growth over stabilization through trade. As a result of limits on imports, the domestic prices of rice and especially of corn rose steadily relative to world benchmark prices. Corn, a crop that is widely grown in sloping and marginal lands, expanded in areas throughout the country. Much of the new land devoted to corn was in areas unsuitable for intensive cultivation, such as sloping lands in more remote areas. Although exact numbers are impossible to calculate, one study concluded that each 10% rise in corn price increased upland soil erosion by about 1.5%. By contributing to the degradation of a key productive asset owned by the poor, self-sufficiency policies actually undermined long-run efforts to end poverty and hunger<br><br>
Food self-sufficiency remains a desirable goal: countries that produce adequate food are less vulnerable to supply shocks. We have seen that limiting imports is not the best - or even necessarily a good way to achieve self-sufficiency. Other approaches focused on improving farm productivity can be much more effective. Moreover, investments in rural infrastructure and improved technology raise rural incomes across the board, meaning that they also reduce the cost of achieving other important Sustainable Development Goals such as poverty reduction and inclusive growth.<br><br>

Trade restrictions, by contrast, are relatively costly and inefficient instruments for achieving the same goals.<br><br>
In addition to its direct benefits for food security, trade also contributes indirectly through the mechanism of gains from specialization. Because these gains contribute to higher income, they increase purchasing power. To the extent that this increase is experienced by low-income households, they are better able to access adequate food supplies.<br><br> 

As we have already seen, the impact of trade on labour productivity, which is the key to higher labour earnings, is greatest in the manufacturing sectors of developing countries. In the next slide, we see that countries with a greater share of manufacturing in total exports are also systematically less exposed to moderate and severe forms of food insecurity.<br><br>
These data from the World Bank show a negative correlation between food insecurity and the share of manufactures in total merchandise exports. Of course, more work is required to establish a causal relationship in the data. In general, however, the causal pathway from manufacturing growth to labour productivity, and thence to earnings, and so to purchasing power, is very clear. Higher purchasing power provides an indirect pathway from trade to food security, especially for lower-income countries such as Cambodia and Bangladesh.<br><br>