The evidence for a positive correlation of trade with growth is extremely strong. This figure plots the average annual growth rate of GDP - against the annual average growth rate of merchandise exports as a share of GDP - that is, the relative importance of trade to an economy. Countries with the highest GDP growth rate per capita, which is on the horizontal axis, also tend to have the highest average growth rates of trade as a share of GDP on the vertical axis. Notice also that many data points fall below a 45-degree line, indicating that in those countries, average growth rates of GDP per capita exceed those of trade in GDP. This is primarily due to the role of services, which are mostly non-traded, but which account for an ever-larger share of spending and employment as per capita incomes rise.<br><br>
Just because trade and growth are correlated does not automatically mean that trade causes growth. For a long time, economists were unable to state definitively that trade does lead to growth, other than one-time gains, which we just discussed and will further explore shortly. However, increasingly rich and abundant data have facilitated many rigorous tests, and the answer is unanimous: more open trade causes more economic growth.<br><br>
There is a large scholarly literature that documents this at the level of the economy as a whole. The mechanisms are also increasingly well understood. Trade increases competition, which improves domestic resource-use efficiency. Firms that export have powerful incentives to improve productivity in order to remain competitive in world markets. And through international trade, it becomes easier and more profitable for firms to acquire and apply new capital, new methods, and technologies. All of these contribute to lasting gains from trade.<br><br>
At the micro-scale, increasingly abundant data on firms allows for rigorous tests of the effects of trade on firms' productivity and profitability. A famous study by Amiti and Konings in the American Economic Review looked at more than 100,000 manufacturing firms in Indonesia. This was an important case study demonstrating the productivity-enhancing effects of the reduced barrier to trade on imported inputs. Likewise, the economist Nina Pavcnik (among others) has documented in Chile and elsewhere that firms that export are more productive and also become more productive over time than those which do not. Finally, recent studies show that external trade liberalization, such as lower tariffs collected by trading partners through the GSP program, facilitates growth by encouraging the expansion of more productive firms.<br><br>