Social and economic activity generates environmental threats. Some, such as solid waste disposal or deforestation, are direct. Most, however, are indirect or at least partially so, meaning that their effects may be felt in locations or at times removed from the original action.<br><br> 

Externalities are a defining characteristic of greenhouse gas emissions leading to climate change damages. Greenhouse gas emissions, most of which emanate from just a few countries, produce effects felt worldwide both in the present and into the future.<br><br>
This graph, using data from World Resources Institute, shows that half of the global greenhouse gas emissions in 2018 came from a handful of countries. In fact, the top-20 countries accounted for almost 75% of the global emissions, whereas the bottom-100 countries altogether generated only 3% of the emissions. Despite their small contribution, those bottom-100 countries, many of which are least-developed countries or small tropical islands, are likely to be the ones that suffer the most from climate change.<br><br>
The effects of trade are often similarly indirect, so quantifying the links between trade and the environment is a very difficult task. With this in mind, we seek first to identify links between climate change, trade, and the environmental SDGs; and second, to identify complementarities, where they exist, between environmental policies and other SDGs.<br><br>
How are the burdens of climate change damages and responses distributed?<br><br>
 
Direct effects of climate change are experienced within the country or region affected. They are greater in the tropics and more severe in low-income economies where resilience to shocks is low and adaptive capacity is limited. So, low-income communities in the tropics are most vulnerable to climate change damages.<br><br>
Spillovers are indirect climate change impacts transmitted through terms of trade and other international economic phenomena. For example, climate change is predicted to expand the feasible grain-growing areas of the temperate zones in the world; this might reduce global prices of rice, wheat, and corn, affecting food markets worldwide. Market spillovers might be beneficial - in this case, lower prices would benefit food consumers - or they might be harmful; for example, producers are now facing lower prices for their outputs. Climate change assessment models typically devote little attention to international spillovers through markets. However, these could be large, especially if climate change affects total global income in addition to changing the geographic distribution of productive capacity between tropical and temperate zones.<br><br>
Among the most vulnerable communities are people in the growing global population of so-called "Climate change refugees" or sometimes "Climate change migrants." They come from some of the poorest and most vulnerable communities in the developing world. The direct effects of climate change—among them, rising sea levels, salination of farmland in coastal and river delta areas, and rising frequency and intensity of storms and floods—set these communities back significantly in terms of progress toward the most basic Sustainable Development Goals, such as that of eliminating extreme poverty. When climate change compels them to move, moreover, they leave behind some of their most valuable assets.<br><br>