International labour standards are legal instruments that regulate ILO member states regarding the basic rights of workers. The ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work of 1998 establishes four of these principles and rights. These are freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining; the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour; the effective abolition of child labour; and the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation. These core principles are also incorporated in Sustainable Development Goal 8.<br><br>
Recall from previous modules that a labour-abundant country has a comparative advantage in labour-intensive goods. That country will export labour-intensive products and import-capital-intensive products. The expansion of labour-intensive industries leads to more demand for labour and, thus, higher wages. These opportunities, on the other hand, also make labour exploitation more profitable. This brings us to the question of whether international trade is synergistic with the labour-related Sustainable Development Goals. The answer is that it depends greatly on the quality of institutions and policies.<br><br>
Institutions are one of the crucial components of synergy between trade and Sustainable Development Goals. Unfortunately, lower-income countries often have weaker institutions than high-income countries. These graphs compare the coverage of social protection systems and expenditure on social protection among countries of different income groups. Poorer countries, on average, have both less coverage of social protection systems and less share of expenditure on social protection.<br><br>
Weaker institutions are the main cause of insufficient labour protections. Because trade creates higher profit from labour exploitation, the effects of weak institutions are exacerbated. Moreover, lower trade costs may encourage multi-national firms to relocate production activities to countries with the lowest production costs, which in turn are often associated with weaker labour standards. A concern to promote export growth may also disincentivize governments from strengthening their own labour standards.<br><br>
The empirical evidence on the relationship between exports and the institutions remains inconclusive. While there are concerns that trade might create a “race to the bottom” in labour standards, there is no firm empirical evidence for this.<br><br> 

A study in 2006 used data from 1993 to 1999 and found that democracy indices such as political rights and civil liberties have a strong positive relationship with exports. In contrast, the relationship between exports and freedom of association and collective bargaining remains unclear.<br><br> 

Another study in 2010 used data from 112 countries from 1980 to 2004 and found that countries with lower rates of work injuries, higher rates of strikes and lockouts, which are indicators of freedom of association and collective bargaining, and stronger political institutions indices, are more likely to export. The author suggested that, contrary to some beliefs, stronger labour standards and institutions help enhance human capital accumulation, promote entrepreneurship, and accelerate economic growth.<br><br>

Lastly, a study in 2003 using data from more than 100 countries from 1980 to 1990 and found no evidence of a relationship between the ratification of ILO conventions and trade or FDI inflows. One possible explanation of this finding could be that the ratification of those conventions does not significantly improve the labour standards. The study, nonetheless, suggests that countries that are open to trade are likely to have better labour standards than the closed ones.<br><br>
Now, let's look at one of the core aspects of labour standards – child labour. Theoretical studies suggest that there might be two counteracting effects of trade on child labour. On the one hand, the increase in exports of unskilled labour-intensive goods makes child labour more profitable than before. Parents in poor households may find that their household is better off financially if children quit school and start working earlier. On the other hand, if we believe that parents send their children to work out of necessity, parents who earn higher income from exporting industries should be able to afford a better option for their children. They might be able to enjoy higher consumption without relying on their children's earnings and may have more disposable income for school costs. Which of these two opposing effects dominates the other remains an open empirical question.<br><br>
Eric Edmonds and Nina Pavcnik studied the effects of agricultural policy reforms in Viet Nam on the use of child labour. They found that reforms led to a 30% increase in rice prices and a decline of about 9 percentage points of child labour usage in rural areas of the country. This graph illustrates the relationship between the increase in rice prices and the decline in child labour. The decline was more pronounced among households that are net rice producers and thus confirms their hypothesis that the increase in parents’ income is the main driver of this result.<br><br>
On the other hand, another study in India in 2010 looked at trade liberalization during the 1990s and found negative effects of trade on child labour. In districts where tariff reductions caused more severe job losses, child labour incidence tends to decline more slowly than in other districts. The worst-affected districts saw an increase in poverty, and thus children are under pressure to leave school and help their parents work.<br><br> 

However, this study focused on the adjustment costs from trade liberalization within previously protected regions. Overall, child labour use in rural India actually declined substantially, from 36% in 1983 to 14% in 1999. School attendance also increased from 49% to 73% over the same period. The lesson from this study is that while trade reduces overall poverty and child labour usage, the benefits may not be equally shared. This points to influences other than trade.<br><br>