We first discuss the relationship between trade and domestic institutions. Good institutions can promote trade by reducing transaction costs and policy uncertainty. Faster customs clearance, non-corrupted officials, a sound legal system – all of these and more make trade less costly and enhance firms' competitiveness. Conversely, trade openness facilitates the exchange of ideas and raises workers' incomes, which in turn encourages them to demand more rights and liberties. Trade and institutions go hand in hand with each other.<br><br>

Empirically, a study by Barry Eichengreen and David Leblang used cross-country data from 1870 to 2000 to analyze the relationship between democracy and trade and capital account openness. They found the causal relationship in both directions. Democracy causes a country to be more open to trade and capital flows, while trade and capital account openness make a country more democratic as well. Another study by David Dollar and Aart Kraay in 2003 showed that both trade and institutional quality, such as the rule of law, contribute to economic growth. They found that institutions, trade, and growth go together in the long run.<br><br>
A case study in India by Saumitra Jha gives an example of how trade can support institutions. He found that Indian towns that used to be trading ports in the precolonial era experienced less religious violence than other towns. The mixing of cultures and religions through trade helped create the institutional infrastructure that allowed people of different religions to share economic gains and live together in greater harmony. This figure shows the shares of towns experiencing no instances of religious violence since 1850. Towns that were medieval ports survived this criterion much longer than their counterparts. <br><br>
Another study by David Dollar and others analyzed the relationship between investment climate and international integration in different cities in Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Honduras, India, Nicaragua, Pakistan, and Peru. They found that firms are more likely to export if they are located in a city where the customs clearance is fast, power outages are infrequent, the government is efficient, and overdraft facilities are readily available.<br><br>