Next, we talk about institutions at the international level. The WTO is the international organization that negotiates trade agreements between countries, resolves trade-related disputes, and helps build trade capacity in developing countries. The work of WTO is built upon the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade or GATT since 1994.<br><br> 

WTO member countries agree to set import tariffs to be no higher than a committed bound rate and are restricted in the use of quantitative, that is, non-tariff barriers to trade. They also agree upon the rules of origin, which determine the origin of products that might have traveled across several borders along the supply chain.<br><br> 

Moreover, the WTO also strives to ensure that non-tariff measures such as sanitary and phytosanitary standards or SPS and technical barriers to trade or TBT are not more obstructive than necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or the environment.<br><br>
Nonetheless, the WTO has a few ”escape clauses” that allow its members to apply some unilateral protective measures in response to specific situations. Anti-dumping measures are used against an exporter who “dumps” or sells products at an unusually low price, while countervailing measures are used against prohibited subsidies. Safeguard measures are temporary protective measures when a surge in imports is causing injury to the domestic industry.<br><br>
Besides the liberalization of trade in goods, the WTO also has several other agreements on other trade-related topics. Some examples include the General Agreement on Trade in Services or GATS, the Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures or TRIMs, the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights or TRIPS, and the Agreement on Government Procurement or GPA.<br><br>
Most benefits under the WTO agreement must follow the most-favored-nation or MFN principle, which means that any preference given to one member must also be given to all other WTO members. Another key principle of the WTO is reciprocity. A WTO member is expected to offer a concession of a similar size to another member who has given it a benefit.<br><br> 

Lastly, the WTO also serves as a dispute settlement body when two or more members disagree with each other on a trade-related issue. The WTO sets up a panel to hear the case and then issue a report that recommends the remedy that the violating party must comply with.<br><br>
Engagement in the rules-based multilateral trading system comes with adjustment costs, and developing countries might lack the resources and policy capacity to implement new rules. Hence, several WTO agreements extend special and differential treatments to assist developing member countries.<br><br>

Those special provisions give favorable treatment to developing countries in several ways. Many WTO-related agreements offer longer transition periods to developing member countries to implement some provisions. Developing countries also receive some exceptions or special considerations regarding anti-dumping, subsidy and countervailing, safeguards, SPS, and TBT measures. In addition, the so-called “Enabling Clause” in the GATT allows the developed members to give preferential and non-reciprocal treatments for developing countries. This clause is the legal basis for the Generalized System of Preferences or GSP. Moreover, several agreements have provisions that encourage developed countries to provide technical assistance to developing countries. Finally, these special provisions sometimes give even greater preference to least-developed countries.<br><br>
Preferential market access for goods is one of the special treatments under the multilateral trading system that helps developing countries engage more easily in global trade. Several high-income countries give non-reciprocal duty-free and quota-free market access for goods imported from developing countries under the Generalized System of Preferences or GSP. The coverage and preferences are often greater for least-developed countries than for other developing countries. Some developing countries also offer duty-free access to goods from least-developed countries.<br><br>
Some GSP donors also provide sub-schemes such as the European Union's GSP+ and Everything But Arms and the United States' African Growth and Opportunity Act. These extend coverage for certain groups of beneficiary countries or for specific products. Besides duty-free and quota-free market access, GSP beneficiaries often receive preferential treatment on rules of origin. Products from least-developed countries can have larger shares of imported components and still qualify for these preferential treatments.<br><br>

Some GSP sub-schemes, such as Everything But Arms and GSP+, nonetheless, require the beneficiaries to comply with human rights and labor rights standards in exchange for additional market access. This is one channel where a trade policy can be used to promote market access and other policy goals simultaneously. We saw in earlier modules that this kind of trade policy can help improve labor and environmental standards in developing countries.<br><br>
Simply liberalizing trade policies, or being granted preferential access to markets, does not guarantee that trade will increase or that gains from trade will be realized. Adjustment can be costly. The WTO’s Aid-for-Trade Initiative, conducted since 2006 with the OECD, aims to support this adjustment. It encourages donor countries to provide financial aid for trade-related capacity-building in developing countries. This financial aid is used to formulate trade policy, build infrastructure, improve productivity in economic sectors, and cover the transition costs that might arise from trade.<br><br>
A 2011 study found that Aid for Trade helps reduce import and export costs. It also found that aid for economic infrastructure helps increase exports. However, it did not find a similar effect on productive capacity building. One possible explanation might be the misallocation of aid towards sectors that have already performed well. There are also gaps between the committed aid and the actual disbursement, as can be seen on this chart.<br><br>
The rules-based trading system is critical in trade negotiations between countries of different bargaining power. The reciprocity principle ensures that larger and smaller countries negotiate with each other on a more level playing field. The most-favored-nation principle allows smaller countries to enjoy the same trade policy benefits that larger countries receive. The WTO’s dispute settlement mechanism allows smaller countries to challenge larger countries’ non-compliance. These principles give small countries incentives to engage with the multilateral trading system and also benefit large countries by giving them more market access.<br><br> 

The system, however, is facing several new challenges that emerge from geopolitical tensions. In recent years, some very large economies like the United States and China have shown willingness to step entirely outside the WTO system. During 2017-2020 the United States administration refused to reappoint judges to the WTO’s Appellate Body, which adjudicates trade disputes. Until this is resolved, WTO dispute resolution cannot function as intended. This is to the disadvantage of smaller and poorer countries.<br><br>
While the multilateral trading system has its own merits, gaining a consensus from more than 160 WTO members can be a painfully long process. As a result, many countries have turned to bilateral and regional trade agreements. Some economists are concerned that bilateralism and regionalism might make the multilateral system less relevant and that least-developed countries could be excluded under these new regimes. Other economists, however, argue that properly designed bilateral and plurilateral trade agreements can complement the WTO’s work by enhancing trade integration and regulatory coherence among their member countries.<br><br>