We next discuss trade agreements that go beyond the work of WTO. This figure shows the number of regional trade agreements currently in force in the Asia-Pacific region that contain specific provisions. The number of such agreements has expanded rapidly since the mid-1990s. Their depth, in terms of added provisions, has also greatly increased. Besides policy issues covered under the WTO framework, these new agreements have broad additional areas. We will discuss this further in the next few slides.<br><br>
The new policy areas covered in modern trade agreements address behind-the-border issues. In contrast with border provisions such as tariffs, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, antidumping, and so on, behind-the-border provisions focus on domestic policies. Examples of these policy areas include intellectual property rights, competition policy, and the activities of state-owned enterprises. These provisions have become more common in trade agreements since the beginning of the 21st century.<br><br>
Lastly, we can categorize regional trade agreements’ provisions based on whether they apply exclusively to the parties to the agreements or more generally. Some benefits of the agreements, such as tariffs, government procurement, movement of a natural person, and antidumping measures, are largely limited to the parties of the agreements. However, benefits from many other provisions, such as sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, customs procedure, competition policy, and intellectual property rights, are likely to be enjoyed by non-parties to the agreements as well. It is hard to exclude the non-parties from the benefits of those policy reforms.<br><br>
How do these new trade agreements affect the Sustainable Development Goals? The direct effect comes from the provisions that address the Sustainable Development Goals themselves. This figure shows the number of agreements that contain each beyond-WTO provision and whether those provisions are legally enforceable. We can see that many such provisions, such as environmental laws, labor market regulations, regional cooperation, consumer protection, and anti-corruption measure, are directly related to the Sustainable Development Goals. Several of those provisions are behind-the-border measures and are applied both to signatories and non-signatories to trade agreements. Nevertheless, many of those provisions also lack legal instruments to make them enforceable.<br><br>
In addition to the provisions that directly address the Sustainable Development Goals, deep trade agreements can also help countries achieve the Sustainable Development Goals through global value chain participation. Recall from earlier modules that trade and integration to the global value chain can bring higher income and productivity to developing countries. This, in turn, leads to cheaper achievements of several SDG targets. According to one recent study, trade agreements that contain more provisions are likely to generate more value-added in the global value chain, particularly in high value-added sectors. The same study also found that provisions beyond the scope of the WTO, such as those covering investment and competition policy, are the main drivers of increases in global-value-chain-related trade, particularly in North-South trade relationships.<br><br>
Provisions in deep trade agreements, however, are not always consistent with the SDGs. One of the most controversial issues of deep trade agreements is intellectual property rights (or IPR). The principle of IPR involves the trade-off between incentives to innovate and inefficient resource allocation. Some products, such as pharmaceuticals, have low manufacturing costs but very high up-front costs of research and development. IPR protections are intended to give innovators temporary monopoly power so as to incentivize them to innovate; this comes at higher costs to consumers.<br><br>

The WTO’s TRIPS Agreement establishes IPR rules in international trade. It also provides some additional flexibility for developing countries. However, some of the newer trade agreements demand much more stringent IPR protection. (These are sometimes called TRIPS-plus.) Debates over access to medicines under deep trade agreements have often been heated. IPR protections limit the rights to produce drugs and vaccines to only the patent holders and their licensees and thus limits access by patients in low-income countries. On the other hand, the rate of innovation of new and improved pharmaceuticals might be much lower if large drug companies cannot count on enough profit to cover their R&D costs. The right balance of rights and access remains controversial.<br><br>
To learn more about provisions of regional trade agreements and the Sustainable Development Goals, please check out the Workshop on Sustainable Development Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements using links on this slide.<br><br>